On Tuesday, Reuters news released an article reporting that BSX may be near a deal to buy Endo Pharmaceutical's American Medical Systems (AMS) division. AMS makes urology/gynecology products. The report suggested that the deal might value AMS at around $2B and could be finalized in the upcoming weeks.
American Medical Systems was acquired by Endo Pharmaceuticals in 2011. The division has annual sales of about $500M ($359M for the first 3 quarters of 2014) and generates estimated annual EBIT of about $160M ($110 M for first 3 quarters of 2014). The company makes urology products such as penile implants, urinary sphincters, and a laser therapy to treat benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH). AMS also makes vaginal mesh and urethral sling products for the gynecology indications. The company had been entangled in vaginal mesh litigation, similar to BSX, but (unlike BSX) has aggressively settled the majority of its cases.
We think that an acquisition of the AMS business would be a favorable transaction for BSX. Our back of the envelop math suggests that such a deal could be about 10% accretive to BSX. Funding the deal by debt would take BSX's net debt/EBITDA ratio from about 2.1x to 3.2x which seems well within reason. AMS's products would drop right into the bag of BSX's existing uro/gyn sales force, thus creating opportunity for significant deal synergies. Most of the urology products would be complementary to BSX's current offerings. There would overlap would in the gynecology mesh and sling products, but this portion of the business has been declining anyhow following the lawsuits. Such a deal would also be beneficial in further diversifying BSX's business away from the flat to decline cardiology markets.
Raising our price target on BSX to $19. An accretive acquisition of AMS would provide a further leg up to our BSX thesis which has been premised on margin expansion and a recovery in the company's core cardiology businesses. At this point, we would still keep the probability of such a deal happening at 50%, but prospects for such a deal are enticing. The other reason for taking our price target up is to reflect the lifting of the litigation overhang following the settlement of the JNJ/Guidant litigation last week. Our price target of $19 now reflects an 18.4x multiple on our 2016 EPS estimate of $1.03.
BSX remains uniquely positioned as one of the few med tech companies with an organic operating margin expansion opportunity that should sustain double-digit EPS growth over the next few years. The company has finally turned the corner from an operational perspective and is gaining share in every one of its core cardio businesses (DES, ICDs, and pacemakers). Key pipeline approvals expected in 2015 include the Synergy DES, Watchman LAA closure device, and the Emblem 2nd generation S-ICD. The settlement of the Guidant litigation lifts an overhang that has been surrounding the stock and should allow the company to achieve a premium valuation to the sector.